---
layout: post
date: 2025-05-22 19:50 +0000
tags: [Networks, Cisco, CCNA, foundations, osi]
title: Chapter 2 - In
categories: ccna-notes
math: true
---

Many types of LANs have existed over the years, but today’s networks use two general
types of LANs: Ethernet LANs and wireless LANs. Ethernet LANs happen to use cables
for the links between nodes, and because many types of cables use copper wires, Ethernet
LANs are often called wired LANs. Ethernet LANs also make use of fiber-optic cabling,
which includes a fiberglass core that devices use to send data using light. In comparison to
Ethernet, wireless LANs do not use wires or cables, instead using radio waves for the links
between nodes; Part V of this book discusses Wireless LANs at length.

## Do I Know This Already?

1. In the LAN for a small office, some user devices connect to the LAN using a cable,
while others connect using wireless technology (and no cable). Which of the following
is true regarding the use of Ethernet in this LAN?
  a. Only the devices that use cables are using Ethernt

2. Which of the following Ethernet standards defines Gigabit Ethernet over UTP cabling?
  c. 1000BASE-T

3. Which of the following is true about Ethernet crossover cables for Fast Ethernet?
   b. Pins 1 and 2 on one end of the cable connect to pins 3 and 6 on the other end of the cable.

4. Each answer lists two types of devices used in a 100BASE-T network. If these devices
were connected with UTP Ethernet cables, which pairs of devices would require a
straight-through cable? (Choose three answers.)
  b. PC and switch
  d. Router and hub
  e. Wireless access point (Ethernet port) and switch

5. Which of the following are advantages of using multimode fiber for an Ethernet link
instead of UTP or single-mode fiber?
  b. To extend the link beyond 100 meters while keeping initial costs as low as possible.
  d. To make use of an existing stock of LED-based SFP/SFP+ modules.

6. Which of the following is true about the CSMA/CD algorithm?
  b. Collisions can happen, but the algorithm defines how the computers should notice
a collision and how to recover.

7. Which of the following is true about the Ethernet FCS field?
    c. It resides in the Ethernet trailer, not the Ethernet header.

8. Which of the following are true about the format of Ethernet addresses? (Choose
three answers.)
  b. Each manufacturer puts a unique OUI code into the first 3 bytes of the address.
  c. Each manufacturer puts a unique OUI code into the first half of the address.
  e. The part of the address that holds this manufacturer’s code is called the OUI.

9. Which of the following terms describe Ethernet addresses that can be used to send
one frame that is delivered to multiple devices on the LAN? (Choose two answers.)
  c. Broadcast address
  d. Multicast address

# The Variety of Ethernet Physical Layer Standards

The term Ethernet refers to an entire family of standards. Some standards define the specif-
ics of how to send data over a particular type of cabling, and at a particular speed. Other
standards define protocols, or rules, that the Ethernet nodes must follow to be a part of an
Ethernet LAN. All these Ethernet standards come from the IEEE and include the number
802.3 as the beginning part of the standard name.
Ethernet supports a large variety of options for physical Ethernet links given its long history
over the last 40 or so years. Today, Ethernet includes many standards for different kinds of
optical and copper cabling, and for speeds from 10 megabits per second (Mbps) up to 400
gigabits per second (Gbps). The standards also differ as far as the types and length of the
cables.
The most fundamental cabling choice has to do with the materials used inside the cable for
the physical transmission of bits: either copper wires or glass fibers. Devices using UTP
cabling transmit data over electrical circuits via the copper wires inside the cable. Fiber-optic
cabling, the more expensive alternative, allows Ethernet nodes to send light over glass fibers
in the center of the cable. Although more expensive, optical cables typically allow longer
cabling distances between nodes.
To be ready to choose the products to purchase for a new Ethernet LAN, a network engineer
must know the names and features of the different Ethernet standards supported in Ethernet
products. The IEEE defines Ethernet physical layer standards using a couple of naming con-
ventions. The formal name begins with 802.3 followed by some suffix letters. The IEEE also
uses more meaningful shortcut names that identify the speed, as well as a clue about whether
the cabling is UTP (with a suffix that includes T) or fiber (with a suffix that includes X).
Table 2-2 lists a few Ethernet physical layer standards.

So, what is an Ethernet LAN? It is a combination of user devices, LAN switches, and dif-
ferent kinds of cabling. Each link can use different types of cables, at different speeds.
However, they all work together to deliver Ethernet frames from the one device on the LAN
to some other device.

# Building Physical Ethernet LANs with UTP

This section focuses on the three most commonly used Ethernet standards: 10BASE-T
(Ethernet), 100BASE-T (Fast Ethernet, or FE), and 1000BASE-T (Gigabit Ethernet, or GE).
Specifically, this section looks at the details of sending data in both directions over a UTP
cable. It then examines the specific wiring of the UTP cables used for 10-Mbps, 100-Mbps,
and 1000-Mbps Ethernet.

## Transmitting Data Using Twisted Pairs
While it is true that Ethernet sends data over UTP cables, the physical means to send the
data uses electricity that flows over the wires inside the UTP cable. To better understand
how Ethernet sends data using electricity, break the idea down into two parts: how to create
an electrical circuit and then how to make that electrical signal communicate 1s and 0s.
The twisting helps solve some important physical transmission
issues. When electrical current passes over any wire, it creates electromagnetic interference
(EMI) that interferes with the electrical signals in nearby wires, including the wires in the
same cable. (EMI between wire pairs in the same cable is called crosstalk.) Twisting the wire
pairs together helps cancel out most of the EMI, so most networking physical links that use
copper wires use twisted pairs.

To complete the physical link, the nodes each need an RJ-45 Ethernet port that matches
the RJ-45 connectors on the cable so that the connectors on the ends of the cable can con-
nect to each node. PCs often include this RJ-45 Ethernet port as part of a network interface
card (NIC), which can be an expansion card on the PC or can be built in to the system itself.

## UTP Cabling Pinouts for 10BASE-T and 100BASE-T

### Straight-Through Cable Pinout

10BASE-T and 100BASE-T use two pairs of wires in a UTP cable, one for each direction.
For correct transmission over the link, the wires in the UTP cable must be connected to the
correct pin positions in the RJ-45 connectors.
Those two wires must be connected to the correct pins in the RJ-45 connector on the switch
so that the switch’s receiver logic can use the correct wires.
To understand the wiring of the cable—which wires need to be in which pin positions on
both ends of the cable—you need to first understand how the NICs and switches work. As
a rule, Ethernet NIC transmitters use the pair connected to pins 1 and 2; the NIC receivers
use a pair of wires at pin positions 3 and 6. LAN switches, knowing those facts about what
Ethernet NICs do, do the opposite: Their receivers use the wire pair at pins 1 and 2, and their
transmitters use the wire pair at pins 3 and 6.

To allow a PC NIC to communicate with a switch, the UTP cable must also use a straight-
through cable pinout. The term pinout refers to the wiring of which color wire is placed
in each of the eight numbered pin positions in the RJ-45 connector. An Ethernet straight-
through cable connects the wire at pin 1 on one end of the cable to pin 1 at the other end of
the cable; the wire at pin 2 needs to connect to pin 2 on the other end of the cable; pin 3 on
one end connects to pin 3 on the other, and so on.

A straight-through cable works correctly when the nodes use opposite pairs for transmitting
data. However, when two like devices connect to an Ethernet link, they both transmit on
the same pins. In that case, you then need another type of cabling pinout called a crossover
cable. The crossover cable pinout crosses the pair at the transmit pins on each device to the
receive pins on the opposite device.

### Choosing the Right Cable Pinouts

The key is to know whether a device acts like a PC NIC, transmitting at pins 1 and 2, or like a switch, transmitting at pins 3 and 6.
Then, just apply the following logic:
| Type                   | Description                                      |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ |
| Crossover cable        | If the endpoints transmit on the same pin pair   |
| Straight-through cable | If the endpoints transmit on different pin pairs |

PC NICs, Routers, Wireless AP transmit on pins 1, 2. Hubs and Switches transmit on pins 3, 6.

> Switches have a feature called auto-mdix that notices when the wrong cable is used and automatically changes its logic to make the link work.

## UTP Cabling Pinouts for 1000BASE-T

UTP Cabling Pinouts for 1000BASE-T
1000BASE-T (Gigabit Ethernet) differs from 10BASE-T and 100BASE-T as far as the cabling
and pinouts. First, 1000BASE-T requires four wire pairs. Second, it uses more advanced
electronics that allow both ends to transmit and receive simultaneously on each wire pair.
However, the wiring pinouts for 1000BASE-T work almost identically to the earlier stan-
dards, adding details for the additional two pairs.
The straight-through cable for 1000BASE-T uses the four wire pairs to create four circuits,
but the pins need to match. It uses the same pinouts for two pairs as do the 10BASE-T and
100BASE-T standards, and it adds a pair at pins 4 and 5 and the final pair at pins 7 and 8.

The Gigabit Ethernet crossover cable crosses the same two-wire pairs as the crossover cable
for the other types of Ethernet (the pairs at pins 1,2 and 3,6). It also crosses the two new
pairs as well (the pair at pins 4,5 with the pair at pins 7,8).

# Building Physical Ethernet LANs with Fiber

The capability of many UTP-based Ethernet standards to use a cable length up to 100 meters
means that the majority of Ethernet cabling in an enterprise uses UTP cables. The distance
from an Ethernet switch to every endpoint on the floor of a building will likely be less than
100m. In some cases, however, an engineer might prefer to use fiber cabling for some links in
an Ethernet LAN, first to reach greater distances, but for other reasons as well.

Fiber-optic cabling uses glass as the medium through which light passes, varying that light
over time to encode 0s and 1s. Instead, fiber-optic cables use fiberglass, which allows a manufacturer to spin a long thin
string (fiber) of flexible glass. A fiber-optic cable holds the fiber in the middle of the cable,
allowing the light to pass through the glass—which is a very important attribute for the pur-
poses of sending data.
Although sending data through a glass fiber works well, the glass fiber by itself needs some
help. The glass could break, so the glass fiber needs some protection and strengthening.

The three outer layers of the cable protect the interior of the cable and make the cables
easier to install and manage, while the inner cladding and core work together to create
the environment to allow transmission of light over the cable. A light source, called the
optical transmitter, shines a light into the core. Light can pass through the core; however,
light reflects off the cladding back into the core.

The figure shows the normal operation of a multimode fiber, characterized by the fact that
the cable allows for multiple angles (modes) of light waves entering the core.
In contrast, single-mode fiber uses a smaller-diameter core, around one-fifth the diameter of
common multimode cables (see Figure 2-17). To transmit light into a much smaller core, a
laser-based transmitter sends light at a single angle (hence the name single-mode).

> Both multimode and single-mode cabling have important roles in Ethernet and meet
> different needs. Multimode improves the maximum distances over UTP, and it uses less expensive
> transmitters as compared with single-mode.

Standards do vary; for instance, the standards for
10 Gigabit Ethernet over Fiber allow for distances up to 400m, which would often allow for
connection of devices in different buildings in the same office park. Single-mode allows dis-
tances into the tens of kilometers, but with slightly more expensive SFP/SFP+ hardware.
To transmit between two devices, you need two cables, one for each direction.
The concept works much like having two electrical circuits with the original
UTP Ethernet standards. Note that the transmit port on one device connects to a cable that
connects to a receive port on the other device, and vice versa with the other cable.

|Standard Cable |Type| Max Distance|
|-|-|-|
|10GBASE-S| MM| 400m|
|10GBASE-LX4 |MM| 300m|
|10GBASE-LR |SM |10km|
|10GBASE-E |SM |30km|

Although distance might be the first criterion to consider when thinking about whether
to use UTP or fiber cabling, a few other tradeoffs exist as well. UTP wins again on cost,
because the cost goes up as you move from UTP, to multimode, and then to single-mode,
due to the extra cost for the transmitters like the SFP and SFP+ modules. UTP has some
negatives, however. First, UTP might work poorly in some electrically noisy environments
such as factories, because UTP can be affected by electromagnetic interference (EMI). Also,
UTP cables emit a faint signal outside the cable, so highly secure networks may choose to
use fiber, which does not create similar emissions, to make the network more secure.

# Sending Data in Ethernet Networks
Although physical layer standards vary quite a bit, other parts of the Ethernet standards work
the same regardless of the type of physical Ethernet link.

## Ethernet Data-Link Protocols
One of the most significant strengths of the Ethernet family of protocols is that these pro-
tocols use the same data-link standard. In fact, the core parts of the data-link standard date
back to the original Ethernet standards.
The Ethernet data-link protocol defines the Ethernet frame: an Ethernet header at the front,
the encapsulated data in the middle, and an Ethernet trailer at the end. Ethernet actually
defines a few alternate formats for the header.

|Preamble| SFD| Destination|Source|Type|Data and Pad|FCS|
|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|
|7|1|6|6|2|46-1500|4|

|Field| Bytes| Description|
|-|-|-|
|Preamble |7| Synchronization.|
|Start Frame Delimiter (SFD)|1| Signifies that the next byte begins the Destination MAC Address field.|
|Destination MAC Address |6| Identifies the intended recipient of this frame.|
|Source MAC Address| 6| Identifies the sender of this frame.|
|Type| 2| Defines the type of protocol listed inside the frame.|
|Data and Pad| 46 --> 1500| Holds data from a higher layer. The sender adds padding to meet the minimum length requirement for this field (46 bytes).|
|Frame Check Sequence (FCS)| 4| Provides a method for the receiving NIC to determine whether the frame experienced transmission errors.|

## Ethernet Addressing
Ethernet addresses, also called Media Access Control (MAC) addresses, are 6-byte-long
(48-bit-long) binary numbers.
Most MAC addresses represent a single NIC or other Ethernet port, so these addresses are
often called a unicast Ethernet address. The term unicast is simply a formal way to refer to
the fact that the address represents one interface to the Ethernet LAN.
In addition to unicast addresses, Ethernet also uses group addresses. Group addresses iden-
tify more than one LAN interface card. A frame sent to a group address might be delivered
to a small set of devices on the LAN, or even to all devices on the LAN. In fact, the IEEE
defines two general categories of group addresses for Ethernet:
Broadcast address: Frames sent to this address should be delivered to all devices on the
Ethernet LAN. It has a value of FFFF.FFFF.FFFF.
Multicast addresses: Frames sent to a multicast Ethernet address will be copied and for-
warded to a subset of the devices on the LAN that volunteers to receive frames sent to a
specific multicast address.

## Identifying Network Layer Protocols with the Ethernet Type Field

While the Ethernet header’s address fields play an important and more obvious role in
Ethernet LANs, the Ethernet Type field plays a much less obvious role. The Ethernet Type
field, or EtherType, sits in the Ethernet data-link layer header, but its purpose is to directly
help the network processing on routers and hosts. Basically, the Type field identifies the
type of network layer (Layer 3) packet that sits inside the Ethernet frame.
Today, the most common network layer protocols are both
from TCP/IP: IP version 4 (IPv4) and IP version 6 (IPv6).

## Error Detection with FCS
Ethernet also defines a way for nodes to find out whether a frame’s bits changed while cross-
ing over an Ethernet link. (Usually, the bits could change because of some kind of electrical
interference, or a bad NIC.) Ethernet, like most data-link protocols, uses a field in the data-
link trailer for the purpose of error detection.

The Ethernet Frame Check Sequence (FCS) field in the Ethernet trailer—the only field in
the Ethernet trailer—gives the receiving node a way to compare results with the sender, to
discover whether errors occurred in the frame. The sender applies a complex math formula
to the frame before sending it, storing the result of the formula in the FCS field. The receiver
applies the same math formula to the received frame. The receiver then compares its own
results with the sender’s results. If the results are the same, the frame did not change; other-
wise, an error occurred, and the receiver discards the frame.
Note that **error detection does not also mean error recovery**. Ethernet defines that the errored
frame should be discarded, but Ethernet does not attempt to recover the lost frame. Other pro-
tocols, notably TCP, recover the lost data by noticing that it is lost and sending the data again.

# Sending Ethernet Frames with Switches and Hubs
Ethernet LANs behave slightly differently depending on whether the LAN has mostly mod-
ern devices, in particular, LAN switches instead of some older LAN devices called LAN
hubs. Basically, the use of more modern switches allows the use of full-duplex logic, which
is much faster and simpler than half-duplex logic, which is required when using hubs. The
final topic in this chapter looks at these basic differences.


Full duplex means that that the NIC or switch port has no half-duplex restrictions. So, to
understand full duplex, you need to understand half duplex, as follows:
Half duplex: The device must wait to send if it is currently receiving a frame; in other
words, it cannot send and receive at the same time.
Full duplex: The device does not have to wait before sending; it can send and receive at
the same time.

Nodes that use half-duplex logic actually use a relatively well-known algorithm called car-
rier sense multiple access with collision detection (CSMA/CD). The algorithm takes care of
the obvious cases but also the cases caused by unfortunate timing. For example, two nodes
could check for an incoming frame at the exact same instant, both realize that no other node
is sending, and both send their frames at the exact same instant, causing a collision. CSMA/
CD covers these cases as well, as follows:
   1. A device with a frame to send listens until the Ethernet is not busy.
   2. When the Ethernet is not busy, the sender begins sending the frame.
   3. The sender listens while sending to discover whether a collision occurs; colli-
      sions might be caused by many reasons, including unfortunate timing. If a colli-
      sion occurs, all currently sending nodes do the following:
      * They send a jamming signal that tells all nodes that a collision happened.
      * They independently choose a random time to wait before trying again, to avoid unfortunate timing.
      * The next attempt starts again at Step 1.

Each NIC and switch port has a duplex setting. For all links
between PCs and switches, or between switches, use full duplex. However, for any link con-
nected to a LAN hub, the connected LAN switch and NIC port should use half duplex. Note
that the hub itself does not use half-duplex logic, instead just repeating incoming signals out
every other port.

> Each NIC and switch port has a duplex setting. For all links
> between PCs and switches, or between switches, use full duplex. However, for any link con-
> nected to a LAN hub, the connected LAN switch and NIC port should use half duplex. Note
> that the hub itself does not use half-duplex logic, instead just repeating incoming signals out
> every other port.

# Key Terms You Should Know
Ethernet, IEEE, wired LAN, wireless LAN, Ethernet frame, 10BASE-T, 100BASE-T,
1000BASE-T, Fast Ethernet, Gigabit Ethernet, Ethernet link, RJ-45, Ethernet port, network
interface card (NIC), straight-through cable, crossover cable, Ethernet address, MAC address,
unicast address, broadcast address, Frame Check Sequence, transceiver, Multimode (MM),
single-mode (SM), electromagnetic Interference (EMI), core, cladding, fiber-optic cable
