---
layout: post
title: chapter3
date: 2025-05-26 15:19 +0000
tags: [Networks, Cisco, CCNA, foundations, wan, ip]
title: Chapter 3 - Fundamentals of WANs and IP Routing
categories: ccna-notes
math: true
---

> Notes from "CCNA 200-301 Official Cert Guide, Volume 1", all rights belong to respective authors. I do not take any credits.


This chapter introduces WANs and the various features of the TCP/IP network layer.
First, for WANs, note that the current CCNA blueprint does not examine WANs in detail as
an end to themselves. However, to understand IP routing, you need to understand the basics
of the two types of WAN links introduced in the first major section of this chapter: serial
links and Ethernet WAN links. In their most basic form, these WAN links connect rout-
ers that sit at sites that can be miles to hundreds of miles apart, allowing communications
between remote sites.
The rest of the chapter then turns to the TCP/IP Network layer, with IP as the center of the
discussion. The second section of the chapter discusses the major features of IP: routing,
addressing, and routing protocols. The final section of the chapter examines a few protocols
other than IP that also help the TCP/IP Network layer create a network that allows end-to-
end communication between endpoints.

# Do I Know This Already?

1. Which of the following fields in the HDLC header used by Cisco routers does Cisco add, beyond the ISO standard HDLC?
   1. ??
2. Two routers, R1 and R2, connect using an Ethernet over MPLS service. The service provides point-to-point service between these two routers only, as a Layer 2 Ethernet service. Which of the following are the most likely to be true about this WAN? (Choose two answers.)
   1. ??
3. Imagine a network with two routers that are connected with a point-to-point HDLC serial link. Each router has an Ethernet, with PC1 sharing the Ethernet with Router1 and PC2 sharing the Ethernet with Router2. When PC1 sends data to PC2,  which of the following is true?
  1. ??
4. Which of the following does a router normally use when making a decision about routing TCP/IP packets?
   1. c. Destination IP address
5. Which of the following are true about a LAN-connected TCP/IP host and its IP routing (forwarding) choices?
   1. c. The host sends packets to its default gateway if the destination IP address is in a different subnet than the host.
6. Which of the following are functions of a routing protocol? (Choose two answers.)
   1. a. Advertising known routes to neighboring routers, c.
7. A company implements a TCP/IP network, with PC1 sitting on an Ethernet LAN. Which of the following protocols and features requires PC1 to learn information from some other server device?
   1. I said a. ARP, but it's C, DNS

# Wide-Area Networks

WAN technologies define the physical (Layer 1) standards and data-link (Layer 2) protocols
used to communicate long distances. This first section examines two such technologies:
leased-line WANs and Ethernet WANs. Leased-line WANs have been an option for net-
works for half a century, are becoming much less common today, but you may still see some
leased-line WAN links in the exam. Ethernet WAN links do use the same data-link protocols
as Ethernet LANs, but they use additional features to make the links work over the much
longer distances required for WANs.

## Leased-Line WANs
To connect LANs using a WAN, the internetwork uses a router connected to each LAN,
with a WAN link between the routers. First, the enterprise’s network engineer would order
some kind of WAN link. A router at each site connects to both the WAN link and the LAN.

> A crooked line between the routers is the common way to represent a leased line when the drawing does not need to show any of the physical details of the line.

This section begins by examining the physical details of leased lines, followed by a discus-
sion of the default data-link protocol for **leased lines (HDLC)**.

The leased line service delivers bits in both directions, at a predetermined speed, using full-
duplex logic. In fact, conceptually it acts as if you had a full-duplex crossover Ethernet link between two routers.

The telephone company (telco) that creates the
leased line installs a large network of cables and specialized switching devices to create its
own computer network. The telco network creates a service that acts like a crossover cable
between two points, but the physical reality is hidden from the customer.

### HDLC Data-Link Details of Leased Lines
A leased line provides a Layer 1 service. In other words, it promises to deliver bits between
the devices connected to the leased line. However, the leased line itself does not define a
data-link layer protocol to be used on the leased line.
3
Because leased lines define only the Layer 1 transmission service, many companies and stan-
dards organizations have created data-link protocols to control and use leased lines. Today,
the two most popular data-link layer protocols used for leased lines between two routers are
High-Level Data Link Control (HDLC) and Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP).
All data-link protocols perform a similar role: to control the correct delivery of data over a
physical link of a particular type. For example, the Ethernet data-link protocol uses a des-
tination address field to identify the correct device that should receive the data and an FCS
field that allows the receiving device to determine whether the data arrived correctly. HDLC
provides similar functions.
HDLC has less work to do than Ethernet because of the simple point-to-point topology of a
leased line. When one router sends an HDLC frame, the frame can go only one place: to the
other end of the link. So, while HDLC has an address field, the destination is implied, and
the actual address is unimportant.

HDLC has other fields and functions similar to Ethernet as well.
| HDLC Field | Ethernet Equivalent | Description                                                                                        |
| ---------- | ------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Flag       | Preamble, SFD       | Lists a recognizable bit pattern so that the receiving nodes realize that a new frame is arriving. |
| Address    | Destination Address | Identifies the destination device.                                                                 |
| Control    | N/A                 | Mostly used for purposes no longer in use today for links between routers.                         |
| Type       | Type                | Identifies the type of Layer 3 packet encapsulated inside the frame.                               |
| FCS        | FCS                 | Identifies a field used by the error detection process. (the only trailer field)                   |


HDLC exists today as a standard of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the
same organization that brought us the OSI model.
> However, ISO standard HDLC does not have a Type field, and routers need to know the type of packet inside the frame. So, Cisco routers use a Cisco-proprietary variation of HDLC that adds a Type field


### How Routers Use a WAN Data Link
So, now that you know a little about
HDLC, it helps to think about how routers use the HDLC protocol when sending data.
First, the TCP/IP network layer focuses on forwarding IP packets from the sending host to
the destination host. The underlying LANs and WANs just act as a way to move the packets
to the next router or end-user device.

Following the steps in the figure, again for a packet sent by PC1 to PC2’s IP address:
1. To send the IP packet to Router R1 next, PC1 encapsulates the IP packet in an Ethernet
frame that has the destination MAC address of R1.
2. Router R1 de-encapsulates (removes) the IP packet from the Ethernet frame, encapsu-
lates the packet into an HDLC frame using an HDLC header and trailer, and forwards
the HDLC frame to Router R2 next.
3. Router R2 de-encapsulates (removes) the IP packet from the HDLC frame, encapsu-
lates the packet into an Ethernet frame that has the destination MAC address of PC2,
and forwards the Ethernet frame to PC2.

## Ethernet as a WAN Technology
The customer con-
nects to an Ethernet link using a router interface. The (fiber) Ethernet link leaves the customer
building and connects to some nearby SP location called a point of presence (PoP). Instead of
a telco switch as shown in Figure 3-3, the SP uses an Ethernet switch. Inside the SP’s network,
the SP uses any technology that it wants to create the specific Ethernet WAN services.

### Ethernet WANs That Create a Layer 2 Service
Ethernet WANs That Create a Layer 2 Service
Ethernet WAN services include a variety of specific services that vary in ways that change
how routers use those services. However, for the purposes of CCNA, you just need to under-
stand the most basic Ethernet WAN service, one that works much like an Ethernet crossover
cable—just over a WAN. In other words:
- Logically, behaves like a point-to-point connection between two routers
- Physically, behaves as if a physical fiber Ethernet link existed between the two routers

## IP Routing

Internet Protocol (IP) focuses on the job of routing data, in the form of IP packets, from the
source host to the destination host. IP does not concern itself with the physical transmission
of data, instead relying on the lower TCP/IP layers to do the physical transmission of the data.
Instead, IP concerns itself with the logical details, rather than physical details, of delivering
data. In particular, the network layer specifies how packets travel end to end over a TCP/IP net-
work, even when the packet crosses many different types of LAN and WAN links.

### Network Layer Routing (Forwarding) Logic

PC1 does some basic analysis and then chooses to send the IP packet to the
router so that the router will forward the packet. PC1 analyzes the destination address and
realizes that PC2’s address (150.150.4.10) is not on the same LAN as PC1. So PC1’s logic tells
it to send the packet to a device whose job it is to know where to route data: a nearby router,
on the same LAN, called PC1’s default router.
To send the IP packet to the default router, the sender sends a data-link frame across the
medium to the nearby router; this frame includes the packet in the data portion of the frame.
That frame uses data-link layer (Layer 2) addressing in the data-link header to ensure that the
nearby router receives the frame.

All routers use the same general process to route the packet. Each router keeps an IP rout-
ing table. This table lists IP address groupings, called IP networks and IP subnets. When a
router receives a packet, it compares the packet’s destination IP address to the entries in the
routing table and makes a match. This matching entry also lists directions that tell the router
where to forward the packet next.

The final router in the path, R3, uses almost the same logic as R1 and R2, but with one minor
difference. R3 needs to forward the packet directly to PC2, not to some other router.

### How Network Layer Routing Uses LANs and WANs

While the network layer routing logic ignores the physical transmission details, the bits still
have to be transmitted. To do that work, the network layer logic in a host or router must
hand off the packet to the data-link layer protocols, which, in turn, ask the physical layer
to actually send the data. The data-link layer adds the appropriate header and trailer to the
packet, creating a frame, before sending the frames over each physical network.
The routing process forwards the network layer packet from end to end through the net-
work, while each data-link frame only takes a smaller part of the trip. Each successive data-
link layer frame moves the packet to the next device that thinks about network layer logic.


